Methodology for Hitting:



Data: 
fangraphs_hitting.csv:
Gathered FanGraphs data from 1990 to 2019 and collected counting stats, rate stats, sabermetrics, 
and batted ball characteristics for hitters with at least 70 plate appearances. However, FanGraphs
did not start collecting batted ball characteristics or pitch level data until 2002 so all years before
are filtered out in the modeling stages. 

player_age_seasons.csv:
Small data set of season, player name, team, age, and playerid. This data is used to add future projection years
(2020 and beyond) with the knowledge of a players age in the future and using their 2019 team as the future team.  

park_factors.csv:
Small data set that holds ESPN park factors for each team.

positions.csv:
Small data set that holds the positions and innings played at each position for each season. Also
holds season, player name, and playerid. 

 

Assumptions: 
If a player plays for multiple teams within the same season, then the team name column is null.
If the team name for a player is null for the current 2019 season, then I take the team they most
recently played on and extrapolate that team into 2019 and future projection years. If a player does
not have a team for years prior to 2019, then I fill that year with the team they played for the following
year. For future projections beyond 2019, I assume their team in the future is the most recent team they 
played for in 2019. For players that played multiple positions within a season, I took the position at which
they played the most innings at as the main position. Lastly, I assumed a players future position is just their 
current position extrapolated into the future. 


Data Manipulation, Cleaning, Engineering:
For players that have played since 2018, I added future seasons (2020 through 2030) using their 2019 team as 
the same team going forward and their projected age for each season. Also, I added an mlb service year 
variable that increments by one after each season starting from their first major league season with at 
least 50 plate appearances. I kept players where projected age is less than or equal to 42. 

To create a clean data set for modeling, I joined the player_age_seasons.csv data with itself on seasons to 
get all possible pairwise combinations of current and projected seasons. I only kept rows where projected seasons
are greater than the current season. For example, Mike Trout's rookie season was in 2011. He will have eight total 
rows in the dataset where the current season is 2011. The projected season increments by one for each row. 
The first row for Mike Trout is where current season is 2011 and the projected season is 2012. The next row is 
where the current season is 2011 and the projected season is 2013 and so on until the most current season (2019).
This example is just for 1 year out projections. The same structure holds for multiple year projections.  
Each row has statistics and info on players for that current season and the projected seasons. There exists 
all possible pairwise comparisons between current season and future porjected seasons.

Next, I wanted to add 2 lagged seasons to each row so that I could use stats for the previous 2 seasons to predict 
how players will perform in future years. For Mike Trout, if the current season is 2015 and I am trying to forecast
2016 performance, I will use is current 2015 season as well as his 2014, and 2013 statistics to project his 2016 
performance. Also, I adjusted the position column to be position group where I grouped LF, CF, RF into a group
called outfield and 1B and 3B into a group called corner infield. I kept catchers into their own position group
and concatenated 2B and SS into middle infielders. Since I want to use a players previous 2 years of performance, 
I cannot project hitters that have less than 3 years of MLB seasons.       

 


Modeling Methods for Hitters:
When training models, I used harmonic mean of plate appearances as a weight between the projected and current 
seasons. Also, I used 3-Fold CV in all of my models. 

I used a two step modeling process to be able to not only have a point estimate for future seasons, but to have
some level of confidence around those point estimates. I chose to focus on projecting at most six years into the 
future. My first step was to use historical data where current season is from 2018 and before and the 
projected season is from 2019 and before. To start, I split the historical data set into a train, test split 
where 2010 is the cutoff. I trained my models from 2002 to 2010 and predicted 2011 as a one year projection and 
stored performance metrics and residuals (RMSE, MAPE {Mean Absolute Percentage Error}). Next, I iterated training
and testing through each one year projection. In other words, I used a moving window approach and incremented my 
train, test cutoff by one for each iteration and increased the prediction season by one until the most recent season.
(train 02-10 & test 11, train 02-11, test 12, ... train 02-18, test 19). For each of the one year out projections, 
I can aggregate and store all residuals, performance metrics to form an error distribution for all one year out 
projections. I did this iteratively for 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 year forecasts. The goal of this is to have a large 
error distribution for each years out forecast that I can sample from and use to formulate a prediction confidence
interval between the point estimates of future projections. 

Now that I have error distributions for each of the years out forecasts, I use all of the histroical data (02-18)
where the most recent current season is 2018 and the most recent projected season is 2019. The model is trained with 
the same x, y inputs and predict up to six years into the future using the test data set that has 2019 as the 
current season, 2018 and 2017 as the prior two seasons and 2020 and beyond for the predictions. The only knowledge 
we have in the future or that we can assume is future age, future position, and future mlb service years. The 
point estimate forecasts will vary based on those factors. Once I have the point estimates, I can use the
mean or median of lots of bootstrap samples from the error distributions and approximate a 95% confidence bound 
by computing the following, point estimate (+ -) 2 * mean of bootstrap sample. In theory, predictions should be
worse the farther you project into the future which means the mean or median of the boostrapped samples should 
increase as years forecasted into the future increases.    
    

1) Project total plate appearances by modeling plate appearances per game in the projected season given 
plate appearances per game in the current season and previous two seasons as well as projected age, 
projected position group, and projected mlb service. I assume all players play 150 games a season so I multiply
projeced plate appearances per game by 150 to get the forecasted total plate appearance per season. 

2) Project strikeout rate given strikeout rate in the current season and previous two seasons as well as current
and prior batted ball characteristics (SwStr%, Swing%, Contact%, Zone%). I also use projected age, projected 
position group, and projected mlb service in years. Lastly, I can estimate number of strikeouts for each batter
by multiplying projected strikeout rate with projected total plate appearances for each season.  

3) Project walk rate given walk rate in the current season and previous two seasons as well as current
and prior batted ball characteristics (SwStr%, Swing%, Contact%, Zone%, Inside Contact%, Outside Contact%,
Inside Swing%, Outside Swing%). I also use projected age, projected position group, and projected mlb service 
in years. Lastly, I can estimate number of walks for each batter by multiplying projected walk rate with 
projected total plate appearances for each season.  

4) Project Total HBP by modeling number of plate appearances per hit by pitch given current and prior 2 seasons
of number of plate appearances per hit by pitch and projected age, projected position group, and projected mlb 
service in years. Find total projected HBP by the following division (Projected PA / Projected PA Per HBP).

5) Project Total SF by modeling number of plate appearances per sacrifice fly given current and prior 2 seasons
of number of plate appearances per sacrifice fly and projected age, projected position group, and projected mlb 
service in years. Find total projected SF by the following division (Projected PA / Projected PA Per SF).

Now, I have enough to project AB by using the formulas (Projected PA - Projected BB - Projected HBP - Projected SF)

6) Project number of balls put into play by modeling proportion of balls put in play out of all PA given batted ball
and plate characterisitics from the current season and previous 2 seasons (GB%, FB%, LD%, Soft%, Med%, Hard%, K%, 
BB%, Contact%, Inside Contact%, Outside Contact%, Swing%). I multiply forecasted proportion of balls put in play
with forecasted PA to get estimated number of balls put into play.

7) Project BABIP 

8) Project FB% then number of fly balls = FB% * BIP

9) Project HR/FB rate, then total HR = HR/FB rate * Number of Fly Balls
 